“We are now seeing the second and third generations of families who first came in the ’60s or earlier,” says Cynthia Romero, chairperson of the organization that oversees the PCC. “Some of them no longer speak the language. We’re here to introduce them and others to the culture and the community.”

The most populous city (with 460,000 people) in the commonwealth, Virginia Beach is a resort destination with a 35-mile-long beach. “We always take out-of-town guests there—Filipinos love the beach,” says Romero. The center of the action is Oceanfront, with its wide, three-mile-long boardwalk lined with hotels, pocket parks, mini stages, and monuments. A peace pole, located near 27th Street, honors Virginia Beach’s five sister cities; one marker points in the direction of Olongapo, Philippines, site of the former naval base of Subic Bay, 8,720 miles away.

At Kempes Landing Park, a ship’s anchor commemorates Virginia Beach’s bond with sister city Olongapo. “It’s a great program of partnership,” says Naomi Estaris, who has deep ties to the community as a business owner and civic activist. “The mayors of each city have each other’s cell phones, firefighters have trained together, there are student exchanges with host families.”

A Philippine American cultural tour isn’t complete without visiting the final resting place of Douglas MacArthur, the so-called “Liberator of the Philippines.” The general is buried under the rotunda of Norfolk’s old City Hall, and his memorabilia—including his signature aviator sunglasses, cap, and pipe—displayed at the museum. MacArthur spent years in Manila before becoming supreme allied commander of the Southwest Pacific Theater during World War II. Forced to retreat, he uttered the famous words: “I shall return.”

“Not only did he keep his promise, but he truly loved the Philippines and respected its people. His wife, Jean, once told me that if he hadn’t been recalled to active duty, they would never have left the Philippines,” says Jeffrey Acosta, the site’s former museum curator. “In a way he was ahead of his time. When his only son was born, he picked Filipinos to be the godparents—in 1938!”